Advanced Topics
===============

System Monitoring
-----------------

Capacity Planning Tips
----------------------

Clustering
----------

Multi-site Setups
-----------------

The "distributed" in distributed version control system should indicate that
Bazaar is  well suited for multi-site development situations and indeed, that
is the case.  The advantage comes from the ease and transparency of managing
merges between branches with divergent history.  Note that there are many,
many different ways to manage widely-flung development setups using Bazaar and
its branching and merging capabilities.  These can be discovered and tested
before being implemented as policy.  We will describe one such possible setup
here.

Consider ProjectX Corp's international expansion with a new branch office in
Darwin, Australia, in addition to the company's headquarters in Paris, Texas,
USA.  One of the difficulties of a far-flung multi-site development
environment such as this is that the network connection between Australia and
Texas is slow and unreliable.  So, each branch office would like the master
branch to be local to them.  (In situations with good network connectivity, a
local branch bound to the remote master may be all that is needed to support
multi-site development.)

Of course, with two master branches, there is always the question of which one
is authoritative.  Given Bazaar's facility at managing multiple branches, we
suggest that it is best not to privilege either the Texas or Australia
branches, but to merge both of them into a separate master branch (which may
reside at either site).  For definiteness, we will locate the master branch at
the Texas site.  So, we will have three branches stored on two servers:
trunk-master and trunk-texas at the Texas site and trunk-australia at the
Darwin site.

Setup
~~~~~

Using our previous setup at the Texas site, we will simply rename the old
trunk branch as trunk-master and branch a copy as trunk-texas.

::
 
  $ cd /srv/bzr/projectx
  $ mv trunk trunk-master              # can simply rename on the filesystem
  $ bzr branch trunk-master trunk-texas   # very fast in a shared repository

In Australia, we need to set up the ``/srv/bzr/projectx`` directory and get a
copy of the current trunk as trunk-australia::

  $ mkdir -p /srv/bzr
  $ cd /srv/bzr
  $ bzr init-repo --no-trees projectx
  $ cd projectx
  $ bzr branch bzr+ssh://server.example.com/srv/bzr/trunk-master
  $ bzr branch trunk-master trunk-australia

Merging to master
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Then, each office works with their local copy of the trunk.  At some point,
sooner or later depending on the pace of development in the two locations, the
two local trunks need to be merged.  (In general, sooner beats later when
merging, since there is no penalty for multiple merges.)  In this example,
Alice at the Texas office will do the merging on her local machine using
branches on the server::

  # Get a copy of the Australia branch in Texas.  After the initial branch
  # command, use pull to keep the branch up to date.  With a slow network,
  # this is the only slow part
  $ bzr branch bzr+ssh://autralia.example.com/srv/bzr/projectx/trunk-australia \
    bzr+ssh://server.example.com/srv/bzr/projectx/trunk-australia
  
  # Check out the master branch locally for doing the merge
  $ cd ~/projectx
  $ bzr checkout bzr+ssh://server.example.com/srv/bzr/projectx/trunk-master
  $ cd trunk-master
  $ bzr merge bzr+ssh://server.example.com/srv/bzr/projectx/trunk-texas
  # Run the test suite and resolve any conflicts
  $ bzr commit -m "Merge Texas branch to master"
  
  # Now, merge from Australia using the local copy of that branch
  $ bzr merge bzr+ssh://server.example.com/srv/bzr/projectx/trunk-australia
  # Run the test suite and resolve any conflicts between the two offices
  $ bzr commit -m "Merge Australia branch to master"

Note that Bazaar does not commit even cleanly applied merges by default.  This
is because although a merge may apply cleanly, the merged state still needs to
be checked before it is committed.  (Just because there are no text conflicts
does not mean that everything will work after a merge.)  If it is desired to
automatically commit when possible, use ``bzr merge --pull``.

Merging back to local trunks
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now the trunk-master branch is the most up-to-date version of the software and
both of the local trunks need to reincorporate the changes from the master.
If no new commits have been made to trunk-texas, then that can happen using
``bzr pull``::

  $ cd ~/projectx
  $ bzr checkout bzr+ssh://server.example.com/srv/bzr/projectx/trunk-texas
  $ cd trunk-texas
  $ bzr pull ../trunk-master  # Use trunk-master from the local disk
                              # No need to commit

If new changes have happened on trunk-texas since the integration with
trunk-master, then the above pull will produce an error suggesting to use
merge::

  $ bzr merge ../trunk-master
  # Run test suite, resolve conflicts
  $ bzr commit -m "Merging Australian changes"

In Australia, they will need to update their local copy of trunk-master::

  $ cd /srv/bzr/projectx/trunk-master
  $ bzr pull     # parent location is used by default

Then, they need to pull or merge the changes from trunk-master into the local
trunk.  This should be done by a developer with a checkout of trunk-australia
so that they can run the test suite::

  $ cd ~/projectx
  $ bzr co bzr+ssh://australia.example.com/srv/bzr/projectx/trunk-australia
  $ cd trunk-australia
  $ bzr merge bzr+ssh://australia.example.com/srv/bzr/projectx/trunk-master
  # Run test suite and integrate Texan changes with only recent local
  # development
  $ bzr commit -m "Integrate work from Texas"


Other Considerations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Multi-site deployments can be complicated, due to the many possible variations
of development velocity, divisions of labor, network connectivity, resources
for integration, etc.  The preceding description is meant to be one possible
way to do fairly symmetric multi-site development.  (Neither Texas or
Australia is privileged in this structure.)  In a situation where there is one
main site and other smaller sites, one of the local trunk branches can be
eliminated and trunk-master can be used directly for development at the main
site.

It is also up to the particular situation how frequently the local trunks are
integrated into the master trunk.  Given resources specifically for
integration, it is conceivable that a developer may be constantly responsible
for integrating changes from the two teams.  Alternatively, the two sites
could work on well-separated, well-defined features and merge to the master
trunk only when their respective features are complete.  Given the difficulty
of resolving conflicts in very large merges and the ease of merge handling in
Bazaar, we suggest that merges be done more frequently, rather than less.
