Location of configuration file
==============================
Each user gets a pair of configurations files in $HOME/.bazaar. The first
one, named bazaar.conf, includes default configuration options. The other
file, branches.conf, contains configuration information for specific
branches.

General Format
==============
An ini file has three types of contructs: section headers, section
variables and comments.

comment
-------
A comment is any line that starts with a "#" (sometimes called a "hash
mark", "pound sign" or "number sign"). Comment lines are ignored by
Bazaar-NG when parsing ini files.

section header
--------------
A section header is a word enclosed in brackets that starts at the begining
of a line, typical section headers look like this::

    [DEFAULT]

The only valid section header for bazaar.conf is [DEFAULT], which is case
senstive. The default section provides for setting variables which can be
overridden with the branch config file.

For branches.conf, the variables from the section with the longest matching
section header are used to the exclusion of other potentially valid section
headers. A section header uses the path for the branch as the section
header. Some examples include::

    [http://mybranches.isp.com/~jdoe/branchdir]
    [/home/jdoe/branches/]



section variables
-----------------

A section variable resides within a section. A section variable contains a
variable name, an equals sign and a value and generally takes the following
form::

    email            = John Doe <jdoe@isp.com>
    check_signatures = require


The main configuration file, bazaar.conf
----------------------------------------

The main configuration file, $HOME/.bazaar/bazaar.conf, only allows one
section called '''[DEFAULT]'''. This default section contains the default
configuration options for all branches. The default section can be
overriden by providing a branch specific section in branches.conf.

A typical bazaar.conf section often looks like the following::

    [DEFAULT]
    email             = John Doe <jdoe@isp.com>
    editor            = /usr/bin/vim
    check_signatures  = check-available
    create_signatures = when-required

$HOME/.bazaar/branches.conf allows one to specify overriding settings for a
specific branch. The format is almost identical to the default section in
bazaar.conf with one significant change: The section header, instead of
saying default, will be the path to a branch that you wish to override a
value for. The ? and * wildcards are supported::

    [/home/jdoe/branches/nethack]
    email = Nethack Admin <nethack@nethack.com>

    [http://hypothetical.site.com/branches/devel-branch]
    create_signatures = always
    check_signatures  = always

    [http://bazaar-ng.org/bzr/*]
    check_signatures  = require

Common Variable options
=======================

email
-----
The email address to use when committing a branch. Typically takes the form
of::

    email = Full Name <account@hostname.tld>

editor
------
The path of the editor that you wish to use if *bzr commit* is run without
a commit log message. This setting is trumped by the environment variables
$BZREDITOR or $EDITOR.

check_signatures
----------------
Defines the behavior for signatures.

require
    the gnupg signature for revisions must be present and must be valid

ignore
    Do not check gnupg signatures of revisions. 

check-available
    (default) If gnupg signatures for revisions are present, check them.
    Bazaar-NG will fail if it finds a bad signature, but will not fail if
    no signature is present

create_signatures
-----------------
Defines the behaviour of signing revisions. Has three possible values:
always, never and when-requied.

always
    sign every new revision that is committed

when-required
    (default) Sign newly committed revisions only when the branch requires
    signed revisions

never
    Refuse to sign newly committed revisions, even if the branch requires signatures

recurse
-------
Only useful in branches.conf. Defines whether or not the configuration for
this section applies to subdirectories:

true
    (default) This section applies to subdirectories as well

false
    This section only applies to the branch at this directory and not
    branches 

gpg_signing_command
-------------------
(Default: "gpg"). Which program should be used to sign and check revisions.
example::

    gpg_signing_command = /usr/bin/gnpg

